exercises/file-downloader-library.md, before:

# Mobile System Design Exercise: File Downloader Library (iOS & Android)

The task is defined as "Design a File Downloader Library." The definition is purposely vague and requires clarification. This guide aims to help you navigate this type of system design question, tailored for both iOS and Android platforms, using modern APIs.

## Gathering Requirements (5 minutes)

Clarifying requirements is crucial. Don't jump into the solution before understanding the problem deeply. Here are some example questions and considerations for iOS and Android:

> **Candidate**: "Are we designing a part of an application or a general-purpose library?"  
> **Interviewer**: "A general-purpose library."

> **Candidate**: "Are we downloading a file from the internet and saving it to the disk?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Yes."

> **Candidate**: "What kind of files do we need to download? Any size constraints?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Any kind - let's assume that we're working with binary files without specific format and no size limit."

> **Candidate**: "Should we support pausing/resume/canceling/listing downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Yes."

> **Candidate**: "Do we need to support simultaneous file downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "I don't know - what do you think?"  
> **Candidate**: "I think, there might be some good use-cases where simultaneous downloads would be useful. For example, downloading a video playlist."

> **Candidate**: "Should we limit the number of active simultaneous downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "I don't know - what do you think?"  
> **Candidate**: "I think, having unrestricted parallel downloads might hurt application performance and quickly exhaust system resources.  Also, without limits we open ourselves up to DOS style attacks. At the same time, we can't make any assumptions about app-specific use-cases, so the best approach might be selecting a sensible default value (for example, no more than `4` parallel downloads) and letting developers configure it based on their application's need."

> **Interviewer**: "Why do you think `4` is a good number for parallel downloads?"  
> **Candidate**: "It's a tricky question. We can use different heuristics to select the best number. For example, we can limit the size to the number of CPU cores on the device."  
> **Candidate**: "On the other hand - each downloader would be blocked on the network I/O so we can use a higher number like `16`."  
> **Candidate**: "It's hard to figure this out for the general case. So `4`-`16` seems reasonable by default. The user may pick a better size depending on the use-case."

> **Candidate**: "Should we support progress reporting for active downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Might skip it for now and discuss it if we have time"

> **Candidate**: "Do we need to handle authentication?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Let's skip it."

> **Candidate**: "Do we need to support [HTTP ranges](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Range_requests) for resumable downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "We can leave it out of scope"

**Platform Specific Considerations:**

*   **iOS:**
    *   **Background Download Considerations:** Ask about background download requirements early.  iOS has strict limitations on background tasks.  Using `URLSessionConfiguration.background(withIdentifier:)` allows downloads to continue even when the app is suspended, but it comes with limitations (e.g., the system decides when the download occurs). Consider the implications of using `BackgroundTasks.framework` for scheduled background tasks.
    *   **File System Access:**  Understand iOS's sandboxed file system. Know the common directories (`Documents`, `Library/Caches`, `tmp`) and their appropriate uses.
*   **Android:**
    *   **Background Download Considerations:** Android's background execution limitations have evolved.  Consider using `WorkManager` for background tasks. `WorkManager` is a more general-purpose solution for deferrable, guaranteed execution tasks.
    *   **DownloadManager**: While Android's `DownloadManager` is an option for background downloads, its usage is often discouraged due to potential security concerns and limited control over the download process. It can be prone to vulnerabilities related to file path injection and unintentional overwriting of existing files. Consider carefully whether the benefits outweigh the risks before using it.
    *   **Permissions:**  Android requires explicit permissions for accessing external storage. Ensure the design accounts for requesting and handling these permissions (`READ_EXTERNAL_STORAGE`, `WRITE_EXTERNAL_STORAGE` for older Android versions; scoped storage considerations for newer versions).
    *   **Power Management:** Android has aggressive power-saving features (Doze mode, App Standby Buckets).  Understand how these might impact background downloads and consider strategies to mitigate issues (e.g., using `WorkManager` with appropriate constraints).

Make sure not to overload the system requirements with unnecessary features. Think in terms of MVP (Minimum Viable Product) and pick features that have the biggest value. You can learn more about requirements gathering [here](https://github.com/weeeBox/mobile-system-design#gathering-requirements).

### Functional requirements
- Developers should be able to simultaneously download multiple files over HTTP to the disk.
- Developers should be able to pause/resume/cancel downloads.
- Developers should be able to list active downloads.

### Non-functional requirements
- Limited active simultaneous downloads.
- Unlimited download file size.

### Out of scope
- Login/Authentication.
- Resumable HTTP-downloads.

## Client Public API (Optional)

Discussing the client-facing API helps demonstrate how developers will interact with the library. The example provided is a good starting point.  Consider how it translates to platform-specific conventions:

```
FileDownloader:
+ init(config: FileDownloaderConfig)
+ download(request: FileDownloadRequest): FileDownloadTask
+ pauseAll()
+ resumeAll()
+ cancelAll()
+ activeTasks(): [FileDownloadTask]

FileDownloadRequest:
+ init(sourceUrl: Url, destPath: String)

FileDownloadTask:
+ addDownloadCallback(callback: FileDownloadCallback)
+ pause()
+ resume()
+ cancel()

FileDownloaderConfig:
+ init(maxParallelDownloads: Int)

FileDownloadCallback:
+ onComplete(request: FileDownloadRequest)
+ onFail(request: FileDownloadRequest, error: String)
+ onCancel(request: FileDownloadRequest)
```

**Platform Specific Considerations:**

*   **iOS (Swift):**
    *   Use Swift's concurrency features (async/await) for cleaner asynchronous code.
    *   Leverage `Result` type for handling success/failure cases in callbacks.
    *   Consider using Combine framework for reactive programming and managing download state.
*   **Android (Kotlin):**
    *   Use Kotlin coroutines for asynchronous operations.
    *   Use `sealed class` or `Result` for representing success/failure outcomes.
    *   Consider using Kotlin Flow (similar to Combine) for reactive data streams.
    *   Leverage Android's `LiveData` or `StateFlow` for observing download progress and status updates in UI.

**API Design Notes:**

*   **Error Handling:** Use specific error types in `onFail` callback to provide more context.
*   **Progress Reporting:**  Consider a `onProgress` callback to report download progress updates.  Throttling these updates is crucial to avoid excessive UI updates.
*   **Configuration:**  The `FileDownloaderConfig` should include options for:
    *   Maximum concurrent downloads
    *   Timeout values
    *   Retry policies (number of retries, backoff strategy)
    *   Custom headers

- **FileDownloader** - represents a single file downloader instance; schedules and maintains active downloads.
- **DownloadRequest** - encapsulates a single download request (source, dest, headers, etc).
- **DownloadTask** - a handle to an asynchronous file downloading operation.
- **FileDownloaderConfig** - encapsulates file downloader configuration. Simplifies downloader instance creation and future refactorings. As an alternative, you may suggest the Builder pattern.
- **FileDownloadCallback** - encapsulate completion/failure callbacks.

## High-Level Diagram

A high-level diagram visualizes the major components and their interactions. You can learn more about high-level diagrams [here](https://github.com/weeeBox/mobile-system-design#high-level-diagram).

![High-level Diagram](/images/exercise-file-downloader-library-high-level-diagram.svg)

### Components
- **File Downloader** - the central component which provides the client API and brings all components together.
- **Download Request** - encapsulates a single file downloading request; accepted by file downloader as input.
- **Download Task** - represents an asynchronous download operation; produced by the file downloader as output.
- **Download Dispatcher** - schedules and dispatches download operations.
- **Network Client** - handles receiving bytes over HTTP.
- **File Store** - writes file contents to the disk.

## Deep Dive: Download Dispatcher

After a high-level discussion, your interviewer might transition to discussing specific system components. Be sure to keep your explanations brief and refrain from overloading them with details. Let your interviewer guide the conversation and prompt you with questions. For more on deep-dive discussions, see [here](https://github.com/weeeBox/mobile-system-design#deep-dive-tweet-feed-flow).

![Download Dispatcher Diagram](/images/exercise-file-downloader-library-deep-dive-download-dispatcher-diagram.svg)

> **Candidate**: "Download Dispatcher maintains a _concurrent_ dispatch queue of jobs. Each job consists of a download request, a download task, and a state (PENDING, ACTIVE, PAUSED, COMPLETED, FAILED). The active jobs are dispatched by download workers."

> **Interviewer**: "Why do you need to maintain a job state?"  
> **Candidate**: "To keep track of _pending_, _active_, and _completed_ jobs: we limit the number of parallel downloads by design. Also, we need to maintain the `pause` state of the scheduled jobs."

> **Interviewer**: "What's the difference between a `Job` and a `Download Worker`?"  
> **Candidate**: "A `Job` encapsulates a single downloading request from the user. A `Download Worker` is responsible for actual data transmission from the network."  
> **Candidate**: "A `Job` is cheap and doesn't do anything. A `Download Worker` is expensive and handles blocking I/O."  
> **Candidate**: "There might be an unlimited number of jobs and only a handful of workers (limited by the pool size)."  
> **Candidate**: "There might be _multiple jobs_ for the same URL but only _one worker_ per download. For example, the same video file can be included in multiple playlists. The user can download these playlists in parallel - as a result, there might be different jobs for the same worker."  
> **Candidate**: "If a single job gets canceled - its worker keeps downloading until done or all the associated jobs are canceled, too."

![Download Job Diagram](/images/exercise-file-downloader-library-job-diagram.svg)

> **Interviewer**: "Why do you need Init and Complete/Fail operations in the File Store?"  
> **Candidate**: "This gives you an ability to pre-allocate disk space before downloading a file and perform post-processing/cleanup after a complete download."

**Platform Specific Considerations:**

*   **iOS:**
    *   **Concurrency:** Use `DispatchQueue` with appropriate Quality of Service (QoS) levels for prioritizing downloads. Consider `OperationQueue` for more complex dependency management between tasks. Utilize `async/await` for structured concurrency.
    *   **File Access:**  Use `FileManager` for file system operations. Be mindful of error handling and potential exceptions.
*   **Android:**
    *   **Concurrency:** Use Kotlin coroutines with `Dispatchers.IO` for I/O-bound operations. Use `ExecutorService` or `ThreadPoolExecutor` for managing worker threads if more control over threading is required.
    *   **File Access:** Use `java.io.File` and related classes for file system operations.  Handle `IOException` appropriately.

**Key Considerations:**

*   **Concurrency Control:**  Implement proper synchronization mechanisms (locks, semaphores, concurrent collections) to prevent race conditions and data corruption when accessing shared resources (e.g., the job queue, file store).
*   **Cancellation:** Implement a robust cancellation mechanism.  This might involve interrupting network connections, deleting partially downloaded files, and updating job states. Utilize `CancellationToken` for more graceful and cooperative cancellation in both iOS and Android.
*   **Retry Mechanism:** Consider adding a retry mechanism with exponential backoff for handling transient network errors.
*   **Prioritization:** If supporting prioritized downloads, implement a priority queue in the Download Dispatcher. Ensure fair scheduling and prevent starvation of low-priority downloads.

## Follow-up Questions

Prepare for questions that modify the original design.

> **Interviewer**: "How would you change your design if the library needs to keep track of downloaded files?"  
> **Candidate**:
>  - "We can add a component ("Progress Store") that maintains a structured record of scheduled jobs in a relational database."
>  - "Each job would have an associated "progress" callback to signal every time the next chunk of bytes is received from the network."
>  - "The Progress Store component will use the job callbacks to update the database."
>  - "Once the job is complete - the corresponding record is deleted."

<div align="center">

|       name       |  type  |
|------------------|--------|
| url              | String |
| path             | String |
| created_at       | Date   |
| total_bytes      | Int    |
| downloaded_bytes | Int    |
| state            | Int    |

</div>

> **Interviewer**: "Why won't you store files in the database?"  
> **Candidate**: "It's easier to access a file on the disk than from the database. We can partially read BLOBs and provide the content as a stream but it might not be sufficient in the general case."

> **Interviewer**: "How would you handle downloading sensitive information?"  
> **Candidate**: "We might introduce an "encrypted" File Store implementation and encrypt a fully-received file in post-processing.  Consider using platform-specific encryption APIs (e.g., `CryptoKit` on iOS, `Jetpack Security` on Android). Not sure if we can do it on the fly - don't have much experience working with encryption libraries."

> **Interviewer**: "How would you change your design to support download requests of different priorities? For example, user-critical, UI-critical, UI-non-critical, low-priority?"  
> **Candidate**: "The first option: update Download Dispatcher to use a priority queue; the second option: configure on the File Downloader instance level and maintain different instances based on the priority (would also require synchronization between instances). The priority information could be included in a Download Request."

## Foreground and Background Downloads (Optional)

Understanding the difference is important.

### Foreground Download
Uses a worker thread in the host application process. Works best for short-running and urgent downloads.

#### pros:
- Immediate execution within the host app.
- Limited only by system resources.
- Easy to set up and troubleshoot.

### cons:
- Stopped when the application is killed or suspended (works slightly different between iOS and Android).

### Background Download 
Might run in a separate process while the app is suspended. Best for long-running and nonurgent downloads.

#### pros:
- Guaranteed execution (iOS - survives backgrounding the app; Android - survives device restart).

#### cons:
- Hard to set up and debug.
- The host OS might wait for optimal conditions to perform the transfer, such as when the device is plugged in or connected to Wi-Fi.
- Must comply with Background Transfer Limitations.

### Implementation Details
- A preferred download method is selected with the File Downloading request.
- The Download Dispatcher selects appropriate Download Worker implementation based on request configuration.

**Platform Specific Considerations:**

*   **iOS:**
    *   **Background Downloads:** Use `URLSessionConfiguration.background(withIdentifier:)` with `URLSessionDownloadTask`.  Handle the `URLSessionDelegate` methods to receive progress updates and completion callbacks.
    *   **Background Tasks Framework:** For tasks that don't fit the `URLSession` model, consider `BackgroundTasks.framework` for scheduling periodic tasks.
*   **Android:**
    *   **WorkManager:** Use `WorkManager` for scheduling reliable background tasks. It adapts to different Android versions and handles Doze mode and App Standby Buckets.

## Major Concerns and Trade-Offs

### Network/CPU/Battery Usage
- Having too many parallel downloads might negatively impact device battery life and increase cellular network usage. A possible workaround is to adjust the concurrency settings depending on the device state. For example, limit the number of parallel downloads to `1` when using the cellular network or having a low battery charge, etc.

### Disk Space Allocation
- Another major decision is whether to pre-allocate disk space or not. For example, the library can create place-holder files for every download in the queue to ensure enough space regardless of the file system state. It's hard to argue about this in a general case - as a workaround this can be configurable while initializing a File Downloader instance.

**Additional Considerations:**

*   **Storage Limits:** Be mindful of device storage limitations. Implement mechanisms to handle low-storage situations gracefully (e.g., pausing downloads, deleting temporary files).
*   **Data Usage:** Provide options for users to control data usage (e.g., only download over Wi-Fi).  Respect the user's preferences and system settings.
*   **Error Handling:** Implement robust error handling to handle network errors, file system errors, and other unexpected situations.  Provide informative error messages to the user.

## Conclusion

- Keep this in mind while preparing for a system design interview:
- Don't try to make it perfect - provide a "signal" instead.
- Listen to your interviewer and keep track of the time.

Try to cover as much ground as possible without digging too much into the implementation details.

Commit message:

Added Deep Dive Topics (#38)
* Added API design principles

* Move API design principles doc to topics directory

Renamed 'api-design-principles.md' to 'topics/api-design-principles.md' and updated the README link to reflect the new location.

* Refine API design principles for clarity and consistency

* Add pagination design best practices to enhance API design guidance

* Refactor pagination strategies documentation for clarity and conciseness

* Add image loading strategies guide and project context document

* Expand image loading strategies with library selection criteria, abstraction, and advanced optimizations, and add a new GEMINI markdown file.

* docs: expand image loading strategies with library selection criteria, abstraction, and advanced optimizations, and add a new GEMINI markdown file.

* docs: add comprehensive guide on offline-first architecture and link it from the README.

* docs: add mobile navigation architecture article and link it from the README.

* feat: Add in-app API design guide and update library exercises with public API examples and deep dive context.

* docs: add major concerns and trade-offs to chat app exercise and refine headings and content in other exercises.

* docs: Refine phrasing for clarity, consistency, and conciseness across multiple articles.

* Removed file

* feat: Enhance mobile navigation architecture and pagination strategies with new sections and detailed explanations

* feat: Add project context documentation and real-world case studies to various topics, and update in-app API library links.

* feat: add project context guide and update Instagram engineering blog link

* docs: Add project context document and refactor mobile navigation architecture by removing case studies.

* docs: Add project context file and update deep dive and Trello blog post links.

* docs: add project context guide and update Trello blog links.

* Apply minor formatting and code language updates to existing topics.

exercises/file-downloader-library.md, after:

# Mobile System Design Exercise: File Downloader Library (iOS & Android)

The task is defined as "Design a File Downloader Library." The definition is purposely vague and requires clarification. This guide aims to help you navigate this type of system design question, tailored for both iOS and Android platforms, using modern APIs.

## Gathering Requirements

Clarifying requirements is crucial. Avoid proceeding to the solution before establishing a deep understanding of the problem. Here are some example questions and considerations for iOS and Android:

> **Candidate**: "Are we designing a part of an application or a general-purpose library?"  
> **Interviewer**: "A general-purpose library."

> **Candidate**: "Are we downloading a file from the internet and saving it to the disk?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Yes."

> **Candidate**: "What kind of files do we need to download? Any size constraints?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Any kind - let's assume that we're working with binary files without specific format and no size limit."

> **Candidate**: "Should we support pausing/resume/canceling/listing downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Yes."

> **Candidate**: "Do we need to support simultaneous file downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "I don't know - what do you think?"  
> **Candidate**: "I think, there might be some good use-cases where simultaneous downloads would be useful. For example, downloading a video playlist."

> **Candidate**: "Should we limit the number of active simultaneous downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "I don't know - what do you think?"  
> **Candidate**: "I think, having unrestricted parallel downloads might hurt application performance and quickly exhaust system resources.  Also, without limits we open ourselves up to DOS style attacks. At the same time, we can't make any assumptions about app-specific use-cases, so the best approach might be selecting a sensible default value (for example, no more than `4` parallel downloads) and letting developers configure it based on their application's need."

> **Interviewer**: "Why do you think `4` is a good number for parallel downloads?"  
> **Candidate**: "It's a tricky question. We can use different heuristics to select the best number. For example, we can limit the size to the number of CPU cores on the device."  
> **Candidate**: "On the other hand - each downloader would be blocked on the network I/O so we can use a higher number like `16`."  
> **Candidate**: "It's hard to figure this out for the general case. So `4`-`16` seems reasonable by default. The user may pick a better size depending on the use-case."

> **Candidate**: "Should we support progress reporting for active downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Might skip it for now and discuss it if we have time"

> **Candidate**: "Do we need to handle authentication?"  
> **Interviewer**: "Let's skip it."

> **Candidate**: "Do we need to support [HTTP ranges](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Range_requests) for resumable downloads?"  
> **Interviewer**: "We can leave it out of scope"

**Platform Specific Considerations:**

*   **iOS:**
    *   **Background Download Considerations:** Ask about background download requirements early.  iOS has strict limitations on background tasks.  Using `URLSessionConfiguration.background(withIdentifier:)` allows downloads to continue even when the app is suspended, but it comes with limitations (e.g., the system decides when the download occurs). Consider the implications of using `BackgroundTasks.framework` for scheduled background tasks.
    *   **File System Access:**  Understand iOS's sandboxed file system. Know the common directories (`Documents`, `Library/Caches`, `tmp`) and their appropriate uses.
*   **Android:**
    *   **Background Download Considerations:** Android's background execution limitations have evolved.  Consider using `WorkManager` for background tasks. `WorkManager` is a more general-purpose solution for deferrable, guaranteed execution tasks.
    *   **DownloadManager**: While Android's `DownloadManager` is an option for background downloads, its usage is often discouraged due to potential security concerns and limited control over the download process. It can be prone to vulnerabilities related to file path injection and unintentional overwriting of existing files. Consider carefully whether the benefits outweigh the risks before using it.
    *   **Permissions:**  Android requires explicit permissions for accessing external storage. Ensure the design accounts for requesting and handling these permissions (`READ_EXTERNAL_STORAGE`, `WRITE_EXTERNAL_STORAGE` for older Android versions; scoped storage considerations for newer versions).
    *   **Power Management:** Android has aggressive power-saving features (Doze mode, App Standby Buckets).  Understand how these might impact background downloads and consider strategies to mitigate issues (e.g., using `WorkManager` with appropriate constraints).

Make sure not to overload the system requirements with unnecessary features. Think in terms of MVP (Minimum Viable Product) and pick features that have the biggest value. You can learn more about requirements gathering [here](https://github.com/weeeBox/mobile-system-design#gathering-requirements).

### Functional requirements
- Developers should be able to simultaneously download multiple files over HTTP to the disk.
- Developers should be able to pause/resume/cancel downloads.
- Developers should be able to list active downloads.

### Non-functional requirements
- Limited active simultaneous downloads.
- Unlimited download file size.

### Out of scope
- Login/Authentication.
- Resumable HTTP-downloads.

## Client Public API (Optional)

Discussing the client-facing API helps demonstrate how developers will interact with the library. The example provided is a good starting point.  Consider how it translates to platform-specific conventions:

```
FileDownloader:
+ init(config: FileDownloaderConfig)
+ download(request: FileDownloadRequest): FileDownloadTask
+ pauseAll()
+ resumeAll()
+ cancelAll()
+ activeTasks(): [FileDownloadTask]

FileDownloadRequest:
+ init(sourceUrl: Url, destPath: String)

FileDownloadTask:
+ addDownloadCallback(callback: FileDownloadCallback)
+ pause()
+ resume()
+ cancel()

FileDownloaderConfig:
+ init(maxParallelDownloads: Int)

FileDownloadCallback:
+ onComplete(request: FileDownloadRequest)
+ onFail(request: FileDownloadRequest, error: String)
+ onCancel(request: FileDownloadRequest)
```

**Platform Specific Considerations:**

*   **iOS (Swift):**
    *   Use Swift's concurrency features (async/await) for cleaner asynchronous code.
    *   Leverage `Result` type for handling success/failure cases in callbacks.
    *   Consider using Combine framework for reactive programming and managing download state.
*   **Android (Kotlin):**
    *   Use Kotlin coroutines for asynchronous operations.
    *   Use `sealed class` or `Result` for representing success/failure outcomes.
    *   Consider using Kotlin Flow (similar to Combine) for reactive data streams.
    *   Leverage Android's `LiveData` or `StateFlow` for observing download progress and status updates in UI.

**API Design Notes:**

*   **Error Handling:** Use specific error types in `onFail` callback to provide more context.
*   **Progress Reporting:**  Consider a `onProgress` callback to report download progress updates.  Throttling these updates is crucial to avoid excessive UI updates.
*   **Configuration:**  The `FileDownloaderConfig` should include options for:
    *   Maximum concurrent downloads
    *   Timeout values
    *   Retry policies (number of retries, backoff strategy)
    *   Custom headers

- **FileDownloader** - represents a single file downloader instance; schedules and maintains active downloads.
- **DownloadRequest** - encapsulates a single download request (source, dest, headers, etc).
- **DownloadTask** - a handle to an asynchronous file downloading operation.
- **FileDownloaderConfig** - encapsulates file downloader configuration. Simplifies downloader instance creation and future refactorings. As an alternative, you may suggest the Builder pattern.
- **FileDownloadCallback** - encapsulate completion/failure callbacks.

## High-Level Diagram

A high-level diagram visualizes the major components and their interactions. You can learn more about high-level diagrams [here](https://github.com/weeeBox/mobile-system-design#high-level-diagram).

![High-level Diagram](/images/exercise-file-downloader-library-high-level-diagram.svg)

### Components
- **File Downloader** - the central component which provides the client API and brings all components together.
- **Download Request** - encapsulates a single file downloading request; accepted by file downloader as input.
- **Download Task** - represents an asynchronous download operation; produced by the file downloader as output.
- **Download Dispatcher** - schedules and dispatches download operations.
- **Network Client** - handles receiving bytes over HTTP.
- **File Store** - writes file contents to the disk.

## Deep Dive
After a high-level discussion, your interviewer might want to discuss some specific components of the system. Make sure to keep your explanation brief and don't overload it with details - let your interviewer guide the conversation and ask questions instead. You can learn more about deep-dive discussions [here](https://github.com/weeeBox/mobile-system-design#deep-dive-tweet-feed-flow).

## Deep Dive: Download Dispatcher

![Download Dispatcher Diagram](/images/exercise-file-downloader-library-deep-dive-download-dispatcher-diagram.svg)

> **Candidate**: "Download Dispatcher maintains a _concurrent_ dispatch queue of jobs. Each job consists of a download request, a download task, and a state (PENDING, ACTIVE, PAUSED, COMPLETED, FAILED). The active jobs are dispatched by download workers."

> **Interviewer**: "Why do you need to maintain a job state?"  
> **Candidate**: "To keep track of _pending_, _active_, and _completed_ jobs: we limit the number of parallel downloads by design. Also, we need to maintain the `pause` state of the scheduled jobs."

> **Interviewer**: "What's the difference between a `Job` and a `Download Worker`?"  
> **Candidate**: "A `Job` encapsulates a single downloading request from the user. A `Download Worker` is responsible for actual data transmission from the network."  
> **Candidate**: "A `Job` is cheap and doesn't do anything. A `Download Worker` is expensive and handles blocking I/O."  
> **Candidate**: "There might be an unlimited number of jobs and only a handful of workers (limited by the pool size)."  
> **Candidate**: "There might be _multiple jobs_ for the same URL but only _one worker_ per download. For example, the same video file can be included in multiple playlists. The user can download these playlists in parallel - as a result, there might be different jobs for the same worker."  
> **Candidate**: "If a single job gets canceled - its worker keeps downloading until done or all the associated jobs are canceled, too."

![Download Job Diagram](/images/exercise-file-downloader-library-job-diagram.svg)

> **Interviewer**: "Why do you need Init and Complete/Fail operations in the File Store?"  
> **Candidate**: "This gives you an ability to pre-allocate disk space before downloading a file and perform post-processing/cleanup after a complete download."

**Platform Specific Considerations:**

*   **iOS:**
    *   **Concurrency:** Use `DispatchQueue` with appropriate Quality of Service (QoS) levels for prioritizing downloads. Consider `OperationQueue` for more complex dependency management between tasks. Utilize `async/await` for structured concurrency.
    *   **File Access:**  Use `FileManager` for file system operations. Be mindful of error handling and potential exceptions.
*   **Android:**
    *   **Concurrency:** Use Kotlin coroutines with `Dispatchers.IO` for I/O-bound operations. Use `ExecutorService` or `ThreadPoolExecutor` for managing worker threads if more control over threading is required.
    *   **File Access:** Use `java.io.File` and related classes for file system operations.  Handle `IOException` appropriately.

**Key Considerations:**

*   **Concurrency Control:**  Implement proper synchronization mechanisms (locks, semaphores, concurrent collections) to prevent race conditions and data corruption when accessing shared resources (e.g., the job queue, file store).
*   **Cancellation:** Implement a robust cancellation mechanism.  This might involve interrupting network connections, deleting partially downloaded files, and updating job states. Utilize `CancellationToken` for more graceful and cooperative cancellation in both iOS and Android.
*   **Retry Mechanism:** Consider adding a retry mechanism with exponential backoff for handling transient network errors.
*   **Prioritization:** If supporting prioritized downloads, implement a priority queue in the Download Dispatcher. Ensure fair scheduling and prevent starvation of low-priority downloads.

## Follow-up Questions

Prepare for questions that modify the original design.

> **Interviewer**: "How would you change your design if the library needs to keep track of downloaded files?"  
> **Candidate**:
>  - "We can add a component ("Progress Store") that maintains a structured record of scheduled jobs in a relational database."
>  - "Each job would have an associated "progress" callback to signal every time the next chunk of bytes is received from the network."
>  - "The Progress Store component will use the job callbacks to update the database."
>  - "Once the job is complete - the corresponding record is deleted."

<div align="center">

|       name       |  type  |
|------------------|--------|
| url              | String |
| path             | String |
| created_at       | Date   |
| total_bytes      | Int    |
| downloaded_bytes | Int    |
| state            | Int    |

</div>

> **Interviewer**: "Why won't you store files in the database?"  
> **Candidate**: "It's easier to access a file on the disk than from the database. We can partially read BLOBs and provide the content as a stream but it might not be sufficient in the general case."

> **Interviewer**: "How would you handle downloading sensitive information?"  
> **Candidate**: "We might introduce an "encrypted" File Store implementation and encrypt a fully-received file in post-processing.  Consider using platform-specific encryption APIs (e.g., `CryptoKit` on iOS, `Jetpack Security` on Android). Not sure if we can do it on the fly - don't have much experience working with encryption libraries."

> **Interviewer**: "How would you change your design to support download requests of different priorities? For example, user-critical, UI-critical, UI-non-critical, low-priority?"  
> **Candidate**: "The first option: update Download Dispatcher to use a priority queue; the second option: configure on the File Downloader instance level and maintain different instances based on the priority (would also require synchronization between instances). The priority information could be included in a Download Request."

## Foreground and Background Downloads (Optional)

Understanding the difference is important.

### Foreground Download
Uses a worker thread in the host application process. Works best for short-running and urgent downloads.

#### pros:
- Immediate execution within the host app.
- Limited only by system resources.
- Easy to set up and troubleshoot.

### cons:
- Stopped when the application is killed or suspended (works slightly different between iOS and Android).

### Background Download 
Might run in a separate process while the app is suspended. Best for long-running and nonurgent downloads.

#### pros:
- Guaranteed execution (iOS - survives backgrounding the app; Android - survives device restart).

#### cons:
- Hard to set up and debug.
- The host OS might wait for optimal conditions to perform the transfer, such as when the device is plugged in or connected to Wi-Fi.
- Must comply with Background Transfer Limitations.

### Implementation Details
- A preferred download method is selected with the File Downloading request.
- The Download Dispatcher selects appropriate Download Worker implementation based on request configuration.

**Platform Specific Considerations:**

*   **iOS:**
    *   **Background Downloads:** Use `URLSessionConfiguration.background(withIdentifier:)` with `URLSessionDownloadTask`.  Handle the `URLSessionDelegate` methods to receive progress updates and completion callbacks.
    *   **Background Tasks Framework:** For tasks that don't fit the `URLSession` model, consider `BackgroundTasks.framework` for scheduling periodic tasks.
*   **Android:**
    *   **WorkManager:** Use `WorkManager` for scheduling reliable background tasks. It adapts to different Android versions and handles Doze mode and App Standby Buckets.

## Major Concerns and Trade-Offs

### Network/CPU/Battery Usage
- Having too many parallel downloads might negatively impact device battery life and increase cellular network usage. A possible workaround is to adjust the concurrency settings depending on the device state. For example, limit the number of parallel downloads to `1` when using the cellular network or having a low battery charge, etc.

### Disk Space Allocation
- Another major decision is whether to pre-allocate disk space or not. For example, the library can create place-holder files for every download in the queue to ensure enough space regardless of the file system state. It's hard to argue about this in a general case - as a workaround this can be configurable while initializing a File Downloader instance.

**Additional Considerations:**

*   **Storage Limits:** Be mindful of device storage limitations. Implement mechanisms to handle low-storage situations gracefully (e.g., pausing downloads, deleting temporary files).
*   **Data Usage:** Provide options for users to control data usage (e.g., only download over Wi-Fi).  Respect the user's preferences and system settings.
*   **Error Handling:** Implement robust error handling to handle network errors, file system errors, and other unexpected situations.  Provide informative error messages to the user.

## Conclusion

- Keep this in mind while preparing for a system design interview:
- Prioritize providing a "signal" over achieving perfection.
- Listen to your interviewer and keep track of the time.

Try to cover as much ground as possible without digging too much into the implementation details.
